To properly appreciate the philosophical view we are interested in, let us distinguish three versions of behaviorism:

Methodological Behaviorism:
: Psychology is the science of behavior and of nothing other than behavior. This is a claim about how to practice psychology. It says that (1) the job of the psychologists is to explain why organisms behave the way they do, and (2) the only legitimate explanations a psychologist can offer are observable stimuli. The idea is that if psychology is to be a science, then it cannot concern itself with anything as murky as the inner workings of the mind. A hypothesis that, for instance, a person feels pain when they stub their toe must be testable if the hypothesis is a scientific one. And it is testable, says that methodological behaviorist, only if the inputs and outputs are observable by many, i.e., only if the hypothesis is about observable behaviors and stimuli. An animal psychologist, on this view, cannot talk about what a lion feels or thinks. Feelings and thoughts are not observable, so they should be no concern of the psychologist.

Psychological Behaviorism:
: Psychology is a rich discipline that must explain many things and one of these things is behavior. Even if the methodological behaviorist is wrong, there are still questions to ask about why humans and animals behave as they do. Psychological behaviorists say that the sources of behavior are external and not internal, that the cause of our behavior is always an environmental cause and never an internal, mental causes. 


One answer to this question is offered by verificationism, a position in the philosophy of language that was attractive to behaviorists. The view was often articulated with the slogan of one of its proponents, Schlick, who claimed the following: 

> The meaning of a statement consists in its method of verification.

So also A.J Ayer in ‘Language, Truth and Logic’ claimed: 

> A sentence is only factually significant to a person if he or she knows what observations would lead him to accept the proposition as being true or false...

> No statement which refers to a reality transcending the limits of all possible sense-experience can possible have any literal significance.

The basic idea is that sentences, at least those that are truth apt, have clearly identifiable tests of their truth. Consider, for instance, 'the cat is on the mat'. This sentence is either true or false---this is what I mean by being 'truth apt'; the sentence is one or the other. I might not currently know if the sentence is true. I might be in the coffee shop unaware of what my cat is doing. Nevertheless, I know what observations could settle the matter. If I were to walk into my apartment and observe a grey, 12lb cat, breathing, and sitting on a mat, I would know that the sentence is true. If I observe no creature on the mat, the sentence is false. Verificationists claim that sentences are meaningful only if there are possible observable tests of their truth; they even claim that the meaning of a sentence consists in these verification conditions, i.e., consists in these observations that prove the sentence true or false.  

My sentence about the cat was an easy one. The observations that verify it are straightforward and clearly connected to cats and mats. But the observations that verify a sentence can be more elaborate and indirect. For instance, many of the sentences in physics are verified by what you might consider indirect observations. We may not be able to see subatomic particles directly, but we can observe the tracks they make in a cloud chamber. So, the observations that verify sentences about subatomic particles will likely be observations about their effects, i.e., the sentence 'a sub-atomic particle A has P' is verified by some observation about the ionized gas particle in the cloud chamber. 

Don't worry too much about this example from physics. I include it only to stress that verificationism allows for many subtle and indirect observations to verify a sentence; they don't think a term is meaningful only if you can directly see what it refers to.  You might indirectly see its referent by, for instance, seeing what effects the thing has. What is important is that 1) there are some clearly identifiable observations that would verify these sentences, 2) these observations are in principle possible by everyone--something is confirmable only if in principle confirmable by everyone, and 3) the meaning of a sentence consists in the set of these observations that prove it true or false. 

Verificationism has an obvious upshot: if no observation can verify a sentence, the sentence is meaningless. And, by 'meaningless', I mean it is a string of sounds as meaningful as, say, 'blah wah doo efle fople wittle.' That's obviously a non-sensical string of words. If no observation could confirm a sentence, the verificationist claims that sentence is similarly non-sensical. There are interesting questions about how to understand sentences about God according to verificationism. But we can set that aside and show the relationship between verificationism and behaviorism as an argument: 


+ P1. The meaning of a sentence is given by the conditions that must be verified to obtain if the sentence is true--call these *verification conditions.*
+ P2. If a sentence has a meaning that can be shared by different speakers, its verification conditions must be accessible to each speaker—that is, they must be publicly observable.
+ P3. Only behavioral and physical phenomena (including physiological occurrences) are publicly observable.
+ C. Therefore, the sharable meaning of any psychological sentence must be specifiable by statements of publicly observable verification conditions, that is, statements describing behavioral and physical conditions that must hold if the psychological statement is true.



Consider the behaviorist's account of wanting ice-cream. X wants ice-cream if and only if:

1. X is disposed to read the dessert menu before reading the main menu--this assumes that X does not want food from the main menu, so we need to assume a want when analyzing X' want for ice-cream. 
2. X is disposed to purchase ice-cream if given a voucher for ice-cream--this depends on whether X believes that the voucher will work, whether X intends to keep his weight in check, etc. So, here we have explained what it is to want ice-cream by appealing to more mental states like belief and intent. 

The problem is that we can't describe behavior in purely physical terms. So, we can't describe the behavior associated with a mental state in purely physical terms. For instance, the behavior associated with the desire for ice-cream can't just be making certain noises. It has to be making those noises intentionally and sincerely, i.e., while having other mental states. But if the behaviorist says this, then he's no longer talking about purely physical behavior. 
 
Hence, the behaviorist faces a dilemma. Either he says that creatures with mental state M are disposed to engage in such-and-such purely physical behavior. But then the claims he makes won't be plausible. There is no single physical way in which all creatures who are in pain behave.  Alternatively, the behaviorist can say creatures with mental state M are disposed to engage in such-and-such mentalistic behavior. But if the behaviorist says this, then he hasn't succeeded in reducing mental facts to purely physical facts.

